                                Muldis::DB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

by Darren Duncan <perl@DarrenDuncan.net>

PREFACE

This distribution features the Perl 5 or 6 (depending on which copy of this
README file you are reading) module named "Muldis::DB" (Full-featured truly
relational DBMS in Perl) and its support structure.

Muldis::DB is the successor of the now-defunct Rosetta DBMS framework,
which it is heavily based on and has learned from, though for all practical
purposes, Muldis::DB is a complete rewrite with significant changes.  (Note
that Muldis::DB was temporarily named QDRDBMS during its pre-release
development phase.)  Given the magnitude of the differences, the actual
change history of Rosetta itself is not relevant, and so Muldis::DB does
not continue its version numbering or maintain the older change log.  The
first Muldis::DB release on CPAN was version 0.0.0, and that was released
2007.06.20.  But Muldis::DB does still declare copyright of 2002-present,
incorporating the Rosetta development/release time-period.

Muldis::DB has 2 co-developed versions, which are written in native Perl 5
and Perl 6 respectively, and which are distributed separately from each
other.  But while the 2 versions would be similar, they are explicitly not
intended to be drop-in substitutable for each other, as each would have
some API differences that optimizes it for its host language.  The actual
Muldis D language specification document will be identical for both,
though.

The Perl 6 version is intended to be the primary version over the long
term, while the Perl 5 version is intended mainly for use in the short
term.  Technically, the Perl 5 version is deprecated in favor of the Perl 6
one, but the Perl 5 version will still be supported for several years in
production environments, as the user demand requires.

Read below for how to get support or keep up to date.

DOCUMENTATION READING ORDER

If you want to read all the Muldis::DB documentation that exists now in
this distribution, I recommend doing so in this order:

   1.       README
   2. (opt) Changes
   3.       lib/Muldis/DB.pm
   4. (opt) lib/Muldis/DB/Copying.pod
   5.       lib/Muldis/DB/Interface.pm
   6.       lib/Muldis/DB/Literal.pm
   7. (opt) lib/Muldis/DB/Validator.pm
   8. (opt) lib/Muldis/DB/Engine/Example.pm
   9.       lib/Muldis/DB/SeeAlso.pod
  10. (opt) TODO

Then you can carry on with anything else.

You may prefer the nicely HTML-formatted versions of the above, which are
available at "http://search.cpan.org/dist/Muldis-DB/".

I also suggest the Muldis-DB-Cookbook distribution, when that is available.

KEEPING UP TO DATE

My module set is constantly under development.  The canonical copies are
all linked to through my website, "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net/", on the
page called "Perl Libraries I Made" (name subject to change).

For those of you that are interested in the bleeding edge of development, I
have all parts of the Muldis::DB project in one or more public
repositories. The Perl 5 Muldis::DB project is in a Git repository whose
Git read-access url is "git://utsl.gen.nz/Muldis-DB" and whose Gitweb
information url is at "http://utsl.gen.nz/gitweb/?p=Muldis-DB".  The Perl 6
Muldis::DB project is in a Subversion repository at
"http://svn.pugscode.org/pugs/ext/Muldis-DB/".  The last version of Rosetta
which was the closest to being functional, created between late 2002 and
late 2005, is in a Subversion repository at
"http://svn.utsl.gen.nz/trunk/Rosetta-old/".

You can download slightly older versions of all of my modules from the
public CPAN archives at "http://www.cpan.org/authors/id/D/DU/DUNCAND/", or
on my own web server at "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net/d/perl/".

CPAN also extracts the POD from modules and maintains that documentation in
an organized and searchable fashion.  Their main search site is at
"http://search.cpan.org", and my own DUNCAND author page is at
"http://search.cpan.org/search?author=DUNCAND".

The main CPAN search site url for Muldis-DB for Perl 5 is
"http://search.cpan.org/dist/Muldis-DB/"; that is the url you should link
to presently if you want something to consider the "home page" of
Muldis-DB; it is best to refer people there by default.

You can download my oldest tarred and gzipped distributions from BACKPAN,
at "http://history.perl.org/backpan/authors/id/D/DU/DUNCAND/", or from my
web server, at "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net/d/perl/archives/", right back
to the libdwg 1.0, first released on 2000 July 23.

SUPPORT

Currently, the best place to get basic support is the appropriate user
forums (see "http://mm.DarrenDuncan.net/mailman/listinfo"), which exist so
that Muldis::DB users can help each other, or that help coming from
Muldis::DB developers can be said once to many people, rather than to each
individually.

Alternately, you can purchase more advanced commercial support for
Muldis::DB from the author; contact "perl@DarrenDuncan.net" for details.

FIN

Share and Enjoy!
