                                  QDRDBMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

by Darren Duncan <perl@DarrenDuncan.net>

PREFACE

This distribution features the Perl 5 module named "QDRDBMS" (A
fully-featured truly relational DBMS in Perl) and its support structure.

QDRDBMS is the first successor of the now-defunct Rosetta DBMS framework,
which it is heavily based on and has learned from, though for all practical
purposes, QDRDBMS is a complete rewrite with significant changes.  Given
the magnitude of the differences, the actual change history of Rosetta
itself is not relevant, and so QDRDBMS does not continue its version
numbering or maintain the older change log.  The first QDRDBMS release on
CPAN is version 0.0.0.  But QDRDBMS does still declare copyright of
2002-present, incorporating the Rosetta development/release time-period.

The QDRDBMS name was intentionally picked to be temporary (it should evoke
"QDOS"), as the current release is a prototype.  In the future, when
QDRDBMS has matured significantly, it is expected that it will be renamed
again to a permanent long-term name.

The long-term name of this project has not yet been decided, though the
author has a 6-letter candidate in mind, to be revealed later for feedback.
In general, new name suggestions are welcomed, with the limitation that
they need to be easy to pronounce, short, and be easily brandable (as well
as trademarkable), so no dictionary words and no names of existing
entities.  Similarly, suggestions for what to name a business, whose
primary activity is commercially developing and supporting this project
plus associated products, is appreciated.  Likewise, the author has a name
in mind, to be revealed later for feedback.

QDRDBMS also has a native Perl 6 version, distributed separately, which is
being co-developed with it, and which will change names at the same time,
but while the 2 versions would be similar, they are explicitly not intended
to be drop-in substitutable for each other, as each would have some API
differences that optimizes it for its host language.  The actual QDRDBMS D
language specification document will be identical for both, though.

The Perl 6 version is intended to be the primary version over the long
term, while the Perl 5 version is intended mainly for use in the short
term.  Technically, the Perl 5 version is deprecated in favor of the Perl 6
one, but the Perl 5 version will still be supported for several years in
production environments, as the user demand requires.

Read below for how to get support or keep up to date.

KEEPING UP TO DATE

My module set is constantly under development.  The canonical copies are
all linked to through my website, "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net/", on the
page called "Perl Libraries I Made" (name subject to change).

For those of you that are interested in the bleeding edge of development, I
have all parts of the QDRDBMS project in one or more public repositories.
The Perl 5 QDRDBMS project is in a Git repository whose Git read-access url
is "git://utsl.gen.nz/QDRDBMS" and whose Gitweb information url is at
"http://utsl.gen.nz/gitweb/?p=QDRDBMS".  The Perl 6 QDRDBMS project is in a
Subversion repository at "http://svn.pugscode.org/pugs/ext/QDRDBMS/".  The
last version of Rosetta which was the closest to being functional, created
between late 2002 and late 2005, is in a Subversion repository at
"http://svn.utsl.gen.nz/trunk/Rosetta-old/".

You can download slightly older versions of all of my modules from the
public CPAN archives at "http://www.cpan.org/authors/id/D/DU/DUNCAND/", or
on my own web server at "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net/d/perl/".

CPAN also extracts the POD from modules and maintains that documentation in
an organized and searchable fashion.  Their main search site is at
"http://search.cpan.org", and my own DUNCAND author page is at
"http://search.cpan.org/search?author=DUNCAND".

You can download my oldest tarred and gzipped distributions from BACKPAN,
at "http://history.perl.org/backpan/authors/id/D/DU/DUNCAND/", or from my
web server, at "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net/d/perl/archives/", right back
to the libdwg 1.0, first released on 2000 July 23.

SUPPORT

Currently, the best place to get basic support is the appropriate user
forums (see "http://mm.DarrenDuncan.net/mailman/listinfo"), which exist so
that QDRDBMS users can help each other, or that help coming from QDRDBMS
developers can be said once to many people, rather than to each
individually.

Alternately, you can purchase more advanced commercial support for QDRDBMS
from the author; contact "perl@DarrenDuncan.net" for details.

FIN

Share and Enjoy!
